 So, good afternoon everybody. I think we can start before starting
 just a quick check with students remotely connected. Can you can you
 hear me and can you see the shared screen? Okay, thank you so much.
 So we can start. Okay. So, welcome to my module. We will get into
 some peripherical perspective compared to the ones you have been
 sharing since the very first day you entered Polytechnical. Before
 giving you a glimpse on what is waiting for you ahead, I think maybe
 we should spend some minutes sharing some very basic instructions.
 And my, thank you, my first, my first attention is to try and
 accompany you during the whole module, my class, in a way that at the
 end of the day, you will be able to be equipped enough to mix your
 technical capabilities, your knowledge in engineering and computer
 science, and more particularly in cyber crimes and cyber security
 with some, let me say soft skills in a sense that almost anything is
 softer compared to being at Polytechnical. So, when I say soft, I'm
 not meaning we're going to spend time like doing some coaching stuff.
 I'm just speaking about being, been doing an intersection between
 STEM disciplines and the knowledge we've drawn from them and social
 sciences. In order to provide you with the most comfortable journey
 within this hybrid path, I would like to assure you that I'm very
 keen on trying that my class be based on some kind of interactions. I
 know it's difficult today to have quite interactive classes because
 we all come from the COVID experience where it was quite difficult to
 remain concentrated, where we had several issues about what we were
 experiencing, the detachment from the physical world, and that may
 have impacted your generation more than mine. So, I will very much
 understand these kind of difficulties. Then I also can quite well
 understand being shy. So, maybe sometimes you don't want to say
 something, to ask something, to comment on something just because you
 are shy. You don't want to expose yourself. And I can understand it
 so much that I have to admit that over my entire career as student,
 both in the BA, MA and the PhD, I think I never made a question
 during a class. So, I very well understand you. Then, you know, life
 is ironical, sometimes it's ironic. And then I had to cope with my
 shyness to just to do this job, you know. But why I'm saying this?
 I'm saying this because the main reason or one among the main reasons
 we don't expose ourselves is because I'm a sociologist, as I will
 tell you in a minute, is because we are social animals and we are
 very well aware that we live in groups, in social groups. And what is
 relevant about trying to cope with living in a social group is the
 social group judgments. So, we don't expose ourselves, not because we
 are silly, no, not because we don't have ideas, not because we have
 nothing to ask about, not because we don't want to comment on
 anything. We don't expose sometimes because we don't feel the
 environment is safe. And I want to assure you that more than teaching
 you something, I'm here to provide you with the safest environment
 possible within the compass of my possibilities, which mainly is that
 I'm very, very keen on respectful, open-minded, acceptable
 interactions among you and me and among you, OK? So, everybody, if
 you want, please interact, don't be shy. It's a new matter, so you
 can't even think that, "Oh, if I ask this, it means I have forgotten
 something "I have studied previously, and you never studied my
 matter." So, that's not an issue at all. There's no naivety, so,
 because you can't be naive if that's completely new, because
 everything is naive when something is new. So, if naivety is a
 constant, as you teach me from your calculus exams, you can delete
 it, you cannot consider it, OK? And secondly, never think that if you
 have questions to raise to me, it's because you haven't understood
 something. It's not about understanding or not being capable of
 understanding. It's the opposite. It's about the will to understand.
 So, you ask something because you want to understand. That's a very
 good sign. As I told yesterday to your mates from the bachelor degree
 class, at the end of a class, the most valuable sign from the class
 for a teacher is that at least one question is reasoned by somebody.
 That's a sign that at least I was capable to interest you first. And
 second, you invest some energy in trying to understand what I said.
 Because it's impossible to get everything at the end of three hours
 not having a single question, OK? I'm not going to promise you that
 we'll be joyful. We're still in a class and it's a sociology class.
 So, probably, if we were in Disney's Pixar's Inside Out, your
 emotions would range between disgust. I'm not going to say fear
 because nobody fears sociology. We are not economists. We are not
 political scientists. We are not technicians. So, you know, we are
 relegated to not being relevant for anyone about anything. But, yeah,
 disgust could be. Maybe anger if you feel you're wasting your time.
 But I can promise you will feel joyful about studying sociology. But
 if by chance you will kind of think that you are grasping that
 feeling even for a moment, try to ride it, OK? And what I can promise
 is that no matter the sentiment connected to my matter, at the end of
 the day, the mix of technical skills and social sciences skills in a
 very complicated set of phenomenon like cyber crimes and cyber
 security is needed. And, of course, I'm not asking to take my work
 for granted. I will demonstrate from the very first day of this class
 with the starting journey through definitions, policies, scientific
 literature and classifications. OK, that's my first set of
 instructions. What about the second set of instructions? Well, we
 only have 20 hours. So we might say that even if it won't be joyful,
 it will be very quick, OK? Second, what I'm looking for here, I'm
 looking to provide you with some sort of tools to interpret complex
 phenomena. And to do so, I will rely mainly on some sort of
 sociological theories about risk, risk perception, trust, digital
 interactions. And before that, we will see that what makes the topic
 quite complicated is that it is not even clear today what kind of
 topic it is. We lack, for example, some clear definition. And, of
 course, many scientists from many disciplines tried to classify, to
 explain, to describe, first of all, cyber security as a set of
 solutions and cyber crimes as a very diverse set of attacks. But we
 didn't make it yet. We do have quite a wide knowledge, but that's not
 enough, OK? Then we will try from the very first moment to emphasize
 the fact that not even, no matter how complicated, how entangling,
 how deep-rooted technologies are, there are still cultural objects.
 At least for the moment, technology is not able to make itself be
 born, OK? We are not living yet in that system. And behind
 technology, there is human knowledge, needs, mistakes, perceptions,
 perspectives, values, roles. All the things that we will learn in a
 few moments are called, from a sociological point of view, culture.
 There are also economical interests and political interests, and also
 some sort of media interests. Just to give you an example, because I
 don't like to speak in abstract, because sociology is very empirical.
 You don't speak of sociology properly if you don't make some data
 analysis, OK? It's not theoretical philosophy, which I really love,
 but that's kind of speculative. Sociology is less noble. You need to
 get your hands dirty just as you are doing in your fields of
 knowledge. And just to give you an example, let's just consider the
 fact that over the last weeks, it seems that cybercrime as an issue
 made to reach the top of the public agenda also in Italy. If you move
 back of 12 months or 12 years, you will notice that it wasn't like
 that. And it wasn't like that, not because there weren't crimes in
 the digital sphere. They were there. Cybercrimes are quite old, but
 they didn't make to reach public attention and political attention as
 well. So that's not about technology. That is not about equations.
 It's about social and political decisions. It's about, for example,
 the media as an intervening variable in building up public attention,
 political awareness and decision making. That's not at all technical.
 And then we will conclude trying to discuss a general framework to
 analyze social impacts of cybercrimes and what kind of awareness and
 perception are out there within policymakers and stakeholders like
 companies all over Europe. We will deal mainly with the Eurobarometer
 data. Eurobarometer is the European agency for public opinion
 analysis. Before starting, as I said, I'm a sociologist. I'm
 associate professor at the Department of Control and Computer
 Engineering. I'm mainly interested in studying, from an empirical and
 theoretical point of view, technoscientific conflicts and the impact
 of technology and science into politics, society and the media
 environment. I love Metallica, Dream Theater, Slipknot. I play prog
 drums since I was a kid. I mean, unfortunately for the moment, for
 the last years, I'm a Juventus supporter, also Juventus women
 supporter. And I love the Indiana Fever in the WNBA, the Orlando
 Magic in the NBA because of Shaquille O'Neal. And then I'm in love
 with manga and anime, mainly mecha and fighting anime, like, you
 know, Tiger Man, Diatom 3, Marcos and Saint Seiya. That's, I think,
 enough to introduce me to you. I have two children of three and
 seven, the mother, Nicola, which I quite often use as example to try
 and make sociology more understandable. That's the agenda. So we will
 start a very brief journey into sociology just to share a common
 ground. Then we will open quite a wider window on giving names to
 things, because if we can't put a label on phenomena under many
 aspects, we can't see them. You only see something when you are able
 to recognize it. And sooner or later, if you recognize something,
 that becomes a piece of information and the piece of information is
 something you can speak about. And if you can speak about something,
 it means you will hold some vocabulary to describe it. It might seem
 quite, you know, childish to say this, but as I told you already,
 cybercrimes and cybersecurity are two topics, two very well connected
 topics that are still lacking some wide shared definition. OK, then
 we will focus on social engineering activities, which is the very
 sociological part of this class. It means that we will read stories
 about cyber activities, criminal cyber activities, and we will use
 them to try and identify those kind of simple elements, simple, not
 as a judgment, but just as a description. So minimal elements that
 are part of a more general set of mechanisms which may have produced,
 not in a deterministic way, the outcomes we will see in the story. So
 the criminal activities we will be discussing to properly address
 this part, we will need to take into account some theoretical parts
 of sociology of culture, sociology of risk and keywords like trust,
 like hazards and so on and so forth. Then we will close the
 sociological part mainly with a discussion about a new way to
 perceive and represent machines and humans. There is an issue online.
 They can't see the slides? That's nice. It must be today because I
 was in an online conference today and the very same thing happened.
 So that's not a plus on my tech abilities. Let's see this. Why, why,
 why? OK, let me say entire screen. Oh, sorry. Thank you. You know,
 just to justify a bit myself, I may say your honor, I'm coming from
 another university where there were completely different systems for
 the teaching rooms and online teaching was forbidden. So that's
 probably my second week of using this stuff or first, maybe. Yeah,
 first by second. Yeah. Now it should be clear. Can you just ask for a
 check online? Let's see if somebody of you is connected and receiving
 a feedback from those. In remote. I'm just looking. For a positive
 feedback. As I'm waiting for a goal from Blavich. OK, is it OK? OK,
 that's thank you so much. So let me just go back just to show you
 that. We have simply been discussing these agenda with nothing more
 than this. But anyway, that's that is giving me the opportunity to
 remind you that slides are already online. OK, so you can download
 them. I put them online some days ago. So you will find within the
 teaching materials. OK. It's a PDF labelled with my name. Then I was
 saying that we will apply some sociological theories to think of a
 new way to perceive and represent the complex relationships among
 machines and human beings. OK. Before. Why? Before starting with the
 brief journey across sociology. Let me just remind you one more
 thing, even though I'm I'm seeing it's not necessary because the room
 is tiny. You are not too many, but I prefer to be clear. Just as I
 said that I'd love to listen to your questions and comments and you
 can interrupt me whenever you want and ask me to repeat for how many
 times you need. Let me just stress this point. Today's class are in a
 sort of augmented reality environment where every one of us has at
 least one device and one screen that can tempt him or her to be
 distracted. So you may be chatting. You may be posting. You may be
 watching, listening and reading anything else than the topic of this
 class. It will be sooner or later addressed as an L.C. issue. The
 this kind of temptation of not being able and I'm speaking starting
 from myself. It's about me, first and foremost, about the temptation
 to not being able to maintain the attention to something different
 from our mobile devices and our screens than than 30 seconds or one
 minute. I strongly believe that in-presence classes are still useful
 because they are not simply the analogical equivalent of a digital
 class. You can stare at people, you can get meaningful information
 from non-verbal communication, you can adjust and tune in with
 several elements which are not just watching to something, listening
 to something. And I do believe that even though I really love
 technology, probably the worst consequence it brought into our lives
 is the fact that it claims. A 24/7, 365 a year attention on it. You
 can take notes using whatever you want, but please, if you if you're
 staying in the class, just try to concentrate and trust me, even
 though I'm trying to pretend I'm not seeing, it's quite clear and
 it's very easy to notice who is paying attention and who is doing
 something else. And let me say, even though it might sound quite
 boomer to to do so, even though it's clear that you are seeing, it's
 unrespectful. There's no other way to say it. So that said, what
 about sociology? The word itself was invented by this man, a French
 philosopher called Auguste Comte. It's not very important for this
 class to know that Auguste Comte invented the word sociology. What is
 important here, because it's the first piece of evidence of a general
 frame I would like you to acquire day after day, is that this very
 definition from what we can call the grandfather of sociology is
 imbued in culture. Let's start making it interactive. Just guess what
 you can infer from this definition about the cultural context of
 1839, the year in which Auguste Comte invented the word sociology.
 Just guess. You won't win anything, but you won't lose either. Just
 think we are in some sort of Netflix series about criminal minds and
 so on and so forth. And guess, you are the detective. That's the only
 piece of evidence. Yeah. OK, first, there is a focus on the
 scientific method, trying to quantify something that, generally
 speaking, we don't think it's quantifiable. OK, then. It's
 deterministic. It's, you know, I never opened my book during high
 school, but then I tried to catch up later. Maybe you remember better
 than me Michelangelo, the famous artist from the Renaissance, the one
 who made these unforgettable sculptures like the Moses or the Petey.
 Just he used to say that his method was to uncover the artwork within
 the stone. So he basically said that the artwork was already inside.
 He only had to free it from the extra. Being deterministic in the
 study of natural laws, it means that you believe that things are
 perfectly already there. And you just have to clean up noises or to
 improve your ability to see what you can't see in a yacht. But once
 you reach these equipments, be it symbolic and cognitive or
 practical, like an emmer and discovering the artwork and freeing it
 from a piece of marble, then it's done. But natural laws are more
 complicated than these and human laws are even more complicated. So
 if we have to sum up your suggestions, first, it's undisputable that
 you can quantify social interactions. And of course, today we do
 apply maths and statistics to social facts, but that's a choice.
 That's a means. That's a means. It's not a destiny. You can apply
 different methods to learn from society. Second. There's a sort of
 cause effect relationship. So just as at that time they believed that
 nature was describable in this way, they came up with the idea that
 society could be as well. And that society, sociology, coming as the
 last scientific discipline in the history of humankind, would find
 itself to be the most complete one. Two hundred years later, more or
 less, we discovered that there was quite, you know, a dream that
 never came true. But that gave us the cultural background of what we
 have studied from philosophy books. It was called positivism. Now,
 let's move forward. And Sir Anthony Giddens, the advisor of the
 former PM from the United Kingdom, Tony Blair, you know, re-resized
 the scope of sociology, making it quite smaller. So no general laws,
 no laws of nature, but just studying something involving humans.
 That's it. But the most interesting definition comes from Chad G.P.T.
 And we read it just to provide you with the different elements and
 the different dimensions involved in the study of cybercrime and
 cybersecurity. I will try to be, I will help you be acquainted with.
 Sociology is the scientific study of society, including the intricate
 patterns of relationship, behaviours and other human interactions. It
 is a systematic examination of social institutions, cultural norms,
 we'll be defining all these words in a minute, and social change
 using empirical research and critical analysis. And it deals with the
 micro, meso and macro level. Those in sociology investigate various
 aspects of human life, including social stratification, movement and
 change, with an emphasis on how collective and individual behaviour
 shapes and are shaped in return by the broader social context. Two
 main figures. Here it is important to remember German sociologist and
 economist Max Weber, because he guides us in understanding two key
 aspects of sociological inquiry. First, it is evolutive. That's not
 naive at all to stress it. We live in a context of digital and
 analogical interactions in which, if you don't take a stand for
 something or for somebody, it means you're out of the debate. Social
 media algorithms have been coded in order to emphasise this sort of
 polarisation effect, because the more polarised the debate, the more
 engaged the debate becomes. There's a huge literature that
 demonstrates this. And I'm not saying it's made because there's some
 sort of master of puppets, to quote my friends Metallica. It's about
 just the fact that you need within your business model to gain your
 users' attention. You don't do this. You're losing money to some
 competitors. So it seems quite natural today that any sort of topic,
 specifically if it gets to become a trending topic, needs to be
 discussed and asks you to talk about it and to take a stance about
 it. I'm not saying that we do it every single time that this occasion
 hits us, but it's quite often. It's becoming natural of the way we
 interact. Yet, as social sciences study phenomena that are quite
 common to any one of us, those many of the sociological and
 politological or the historic facts that social sciences study are
 something that at least we have heard about once, at least once, or
 we have experienced. Just think about those studies about
 inequalities or minority exclusion or, let me say, or some health
 policy. I think we have very well touched this during the lockdown
 and the COVID period. We were living it. There were experts or
 so-called on the media trying to explain to us what was going on.
 Some of them didn't even know. And it was so impactful that every one
 of us had ideas, opinions, dilemmas, feelings about it. Just think
 about studying this, not taking into account what Weber said, the
 fact that you must try to minimise your subjectivity, which doesn't
 mean that a social scientist doesn't have opinions, doesn't make
 mistakes, doesn't have stereotypes or can be rude or unpolite. It's
 just that at least when you're studying something, your goal should
 not be judging. Because we already judge about anything and everybody
 the rest of the time. At least when we wear the invisible cloak of
 social scientist, we should try to minimise this kind of biases. And
 second, the second lesson we learned from Weber is no matter how good
 at math you are, no matter how very respectful statistician you are.
 The epistemic status of the data you are dealing with, it's of
 uncertain information. There might be systemic errors in your data
 sets, accidental errors, and they are due to the sometimes the
 impossibility to have direct access to some sort of phenomenon. Just
 thinking about studying criminality, of course, social sciences study
 criminality a lot. We are going to have this example in cyber
 criminal and cyber crimes, but. But you can't have access the way you
 would like to have in these kind of environments. Unless you are a
 criminal yourself and then you want to make a sociological study. But
 that's I think it's an exception. Normally, if you study from
 outside, you can try and enter these new groups and study new
 activities. But the fact that they are somehow at least partly
 accessible limits the scope of the conclusions you are reaching. And
 then even when you can full access to your sources, just think of
 applying some social science theory to marketing or to user interface
 design or to the user experience or to the impact of generative
 artificial intelligence into classes and schools and so on and so
 forth. In that cases, you do have complete access to your
 environment. But you have social desirability. It means that when you
 interview people, they may act strategically and tell you.
 Information that will became data, they may be partly biased because
 people and every one of us, when they try to recall the past. That's
 not objective. That's subjective. You reinvent the past once you
 recall it. And that's not because you are a liar. It's because that's
 the way our mind works. And then sometimes you want to be a liar. And
 that's not because you are a liar in the sense of a bad person. It's
 because we are completely aware of the importance to project outside
 of us a certain image of us in order to be accepted. And that may be
 conflict with the need of truth that the researcher is looking for
 when he interviews, when he or she interviews you. So those are just
 a few examples in order to justify why Max Weber, almost 100 years
 ago, warned us about the fact that social sciences, just like
 archaeology and just like history, are made of uncertain data. Even
 when statistical significance is strong, it doesn't mean that you
 can't theorize anything in social sciences. It means that you cannot
 think that studying human interactions is the same of putting a
 molecule under a microscope. Before the break, let's just talk about
 the second relevant figure I want to introduce to you. Charles Wright
 Mills, a sociologist from the US, the 50s and the 60s, the one who
 studied the white collars. And I'm going to take his lesson here just
 to focus on one single element. What he used to call sociological
 imagination, because this is basically just summing up everything we
 are going to see together. If you're going to ask me what is
 important to keep with me at the end of the day. Don't take it, you
 know, just keep quite several things, because otherwise it would be
 difficult to pass the exam. But after you have passed, and I hope
 very successfully pass the exam. If one thing could be useful to
 remain with you is this kind of cognitive skill, the sociological
 imagination. Because this is the very key element that in my personal
 point of view, the Polytechnical was looking for when over the last
 years, it decided to shift to the idea that the Polytechnical wanted
 to open to a new figure, public figure of engineer. The, let me say,
 the humanity engineer. So very skilled at technical stuff, very well
 equipped with math, physics, chem and so on and so forth. But. Very
 well aware of the main elements related to social sciences, not just
 because it's, you know, it's cool to have today this kind of old
 fashioned renaissance period, cultural heritage in which, you know,
 Brunelleschi, the one who was able to close the Dome in Florence
 after a hundred years, he remained open, you know, the story of the
 Dome in Florence. They they had these walls built, but they weren't
 able to close the Dome. And then he invented a way to. But he was,
 you know, he was an orphe, he was working with gold. It wasn't even
 an engineer, but he also invented perspective. He was a
 mathematician. And then he was also an artist. And then he was also a
 philosopher, as all the artists of that time. So and then he invented
 the Argonaum, a new kind of Argonaum in order to make it quicker and
 safer to bring heavy weights to the top. And that's why he made it to
 close the Dome, because he needed to have the materials faster than
 usual, than usual to close it in a way that otherwise the Dome would
 have collapsed inside. And then he invented these two layers, a
 smaller and lighter one and a bigger and visible one. So what would
 you say Brunelleschi is a genius? Yeah, maybe. But then what he is,
 he's an architect. He's an architect, he is a physicist, he is an
 artist, he is a mathematician, he is what? He's an artisan. That was
 his real job. He was an artisan. So if you have to, if I have to say
 at the end of the day, if the model is trying to translate this ideal
 type in today's context, what you should hold with you after my
 class, the sociological imagination, the capability to see when you
 want to social phenomena through the eyes of scientific inquiry, not
 through common sense and stereotypes. It's not an ethical or a moral
 praise, OK? I'm not a moral philosopher and I'm not a religious
 opinion leader or official, OK? So it's not about morality. You do
 whatever you want in your life. Take care of you and the others and
 then you do whatever you want. It's about scientific method applied
 to social sciences. And in doing so, that means that you should be
 able to get unsatisfied with common sense answers and explanations.
 Let me just provide you with an example. When we will be reading the
 stories of social engineering attacks, the first thing that might
 bump on minds smart and very well equipped like yours, it will be
 that will never happen to me. That's too stupid. That's about
 illiteracy. Maybe sometimes it might be we are. Let me say we all are
 stupid, at least sometimes. And it's part of being human. But if we
 take the answer, it's about illiteracy or stupidity for granted. We
 don't need this class. But it's not because I need to have this class
 to feed my children. It's about the fact that those answers are not
 enough. And they are not enough because we will see that this kind of
 mistake or scams rely on dimensions, which are not fully filled by
 one single variable as explanantes, as the variable which explains
 the phenomenon. And if we completely move to something else, just to
 give you another example, when you're studying opposition to
 vaccines, you might think it might be stupidity or it might be. Let
 me say it might be illiteracy. You don't you you haven't studied
 science, health or medicine. So you are scared of. So how can you
 possibly explain doctors, physicians, nurses being scared of vaccines
 and choosing not to vaccinate themselves? Second, how do you explain
 the some very big research is all over the world, which cross
 tabulates income level of education to opposition to vaccines,
 demonstrating that it's not the more ignorant, the most ignorant or
 the poorer, which don't want to be vaccinated? It's the opposite. The
 problem is some sort of very wealthy people all over the world, which
 believe in some sort of pseudoscientific philosophies and decided not
 to vaccinate for papillomavirus, their daughters, for example. And
 papillomavirus bring a virus, brings cancer. And it's free in many
 countries. It's not about praising for or against being vaccinated.
 Let's go back. Avalutativity. It's not a moral class. Everyone
 decides and takes responsibility. It's about good or bad
 explanations. If you are stick to the common sense, the more you are
 ignorant, the more you will likely to be scammed or not to vaccinate
 your children. That's false in the statistical sense of the matter.
 It's false because when you gain, when you gather data and you
 analyze them, you see that under many aspects, the opposite
 relationship is seen. It's just of being creative in the sense of
 right meals. You have to stay, stick to the data. Of course, you may
 have theories you want to try to verify. But in social sciences, we
 barely use the verb verifying. We use the Popperian ones, the
 philosopher of science since the London School of Economics, which
 was falsifying. So you taste that the zero hypothesis is false. And
 then if you see a significant gap in expected and observed
 frequencies, then you may say that it would be more likely to make a
 mistake if you reject the one hypothesis. OK, that's the logic. And
 with the same logic, and then I'm concluding this first part of the
 class, as you have to overcome stereotypes and common sense at the
 same time, don't put your prejudices, don't think that your values,
 don't think that your system of coordinates is the only one available
 out there. So that when something particularly far from your system
 of inertia, if you let me use this terminology, hits you, you reject
 it. Of course, we do it in everyday life. We don't get on well
 together with everybody. We don't like any kind of music, movies. We
 don't have the same taste at the table. So it's not about saying we
 have to conform to a sort of general agreement. It's about the
 opposite. When you are trying to provide scientific explanations
 about social phenomena, you don't have to be skewed by the fact that
 the object of your study seems too far from your perceptions and
 perspectives. Because if you accept and react to this diversity,
 refusing it, you become valutative. So you are building a sort of
 prerequisite which assesses what has the dignity to be studied and
 what hasn't. And I don't want to speak in abstract. Let's talk about
 concrete things. Anthropology at the end of the 19th century, the
 mainstream anthropology was racist. Today, we would say that those
 scholars wouldn't be allowed to universities and to publications.
 Because they moved abroad considering savages, the tribes and the
 groups, the social groups they would have met. That's the sort of
 lacking sociological creativity, sociological imagination. Of course,
 we today, at least in social sciences, are not that naive. But you
 don't need to be racist and clearly racist to apply some sort of
 filter so dramatically strong that impedes you to look at the object
 with some sort of detachment and suspending the judgment. This is the
 key word. Suspend the judgment. OK, any questions. Comments and
 doubts. OK, 10 minutes break. [BLANK_AUDIO] [BLANK_AUDIO]
 [BLANK_AUDIO] [BLANK_AUDIO] OK, let's start again. We are moving
 toward the end of the sociological journey and about to enter the
 social crimes and social security set of definitions. But before
 doing that, let me give you some definitions about key words in
 sociology that we will very frequently happen to encounter during the
 remaining parts of this class. And we may start from norms. The term
 norm describes rules and expectations by which a society guides the
 way its components behave. When we talk about people in a society
 from the point of view of social sciences, we often use the term
 social actors or only actors. So if you're going to hear me from now
 on using the word actor or actors, it's not about transforming this
 class in a drama class. It's about the fact that sociology uses the
 theatrical metaphors to describe the interactions within a society.
 And that's mainly thanks to one sociologist that I didn't put here.
 But we will be talking about his theory sooner or later. And I'm
 referring to American sociologist of the 50s and 60s, Irving Goffman.
 Which, by the way, if you have seen the most beautiful interrupted
 Netflix TV series, Mindhunters. Did you watch it? Yeah. I'm still
 hoping that with the petition we managed to convince Netflix to
 rebuild the series. But it's a series about I'm not going to spoiler
 up anything because there's nothing to spoiler about because he never
 came to an end. But it's the story of the detective team,
 multidisciplinary team made of one university professor and two
 detectives, a junior and a senior one. And that was the team which
 invented the word serial killer. But before inventing the word, they
 analysed also from what we can say a sociological perspective,
 different crime scenes. And they've studied patterns with common
 traits and peculiarities in several cases. And then they reach the
 psychological level. So the mind. Of of such criminals. But there is
 this scene. Which the first time I saw I was moved because, you know,
 there are very there are very relevant political scientists in
 politics, in finance, in in business and institutions that are
 relevant economists all over the the main roles in the world. But you
 never heard about the sociologists become that important. So my
 personal victory was seeing in a series that one of the main
 character, the junior one, one night was in bed reading a book. And
 that book was Irving Goffman's book. The one that we still today
 refer to when we want to interpret social interactions and social
 communications as a TV drama, as a theatrical drama. So words like
 actors, front stage, backstage, back end, front end, roles, norms. We
 can gather them and somehow connect them to the work of Irving
 Goffman. There wasn't only Irving Goffman, of course, but he is
 probably the most relevant sociologist about this perspective. So
 norms are sets of rules that you are given because you are recognised
 as a member, as an actor within a context, a society. This, this very
 room is a society. The survivors of the Andes plane crash in the 60s
 or 70s, when it was a society. Indeed, the new, the recent movie
 about it was called There's No Society. The world itself is a
 society. Your country is a society. Your sports team is a society.
 Your family is a society. We usually speak of groups when they are
 not very big. But some sort of mechanisms, we can see them at the
 very micro as well as the macro level. So I'm not saying it's
 precisely the same, but the format, it's almost the same. OK, so
 norms are rules. But what kind of rules? There are mainly two types
 of rules. Explicit norms and implicit or tacit norms. Why it is
 important to stress on this, because we will see that. Cyber
 criminals. Mostly reliance on tacit norms to get the attacked. Behave
 in the way they want to behave, it to behave or him or her to behave.
 It's mostly about tacit norms. Explicit norms are the rules you have
 when you apply to a university. Explicit norms are the codes of law
 within a nation. The explicit norms is another example is the code,
 the book code. You have to study if you want to get a license, a
 driving license. That's an explicit. But there is also an implicit
 one. The implicit code is that if nobody sees you, maybe you do
 something and I'm not suggesting to do so. So please don't do this at
 home. But. Every one of us has witnessed at least once one case in
 which we knew that was red, but somebody has passed the crossing with
 the red, even though the code is quite clear about it. You stop if
 it's red, OK, or you don't go with an electric kick scooter on the
 walking side. Or you don't go with your bicycle in the opposite sense
 is if it's a one way road. OK. So, you know, that means that you can
 break explicit norms, but it's even easier to break implicit norms.
 But the fact that they are implicit, it doesn't mean they don't
 exist. They may be invisible for newcomers. The Martian look we
 spoke, I put in the slide of right meals. It's precisely this.
 Imagine someone coming from Mars. Knowing nothing about how in our
 culture, the university environment works. If he, it, she, you decide
 the pranam, would ask, why are you sitting? Why are you staring at
 him? Why are you not moving? Or why is somebody staring at him and
 some others are staring at the screens before them? Why somebody is
 speaking to his neighbor and others are quiet? Why is he holding
 something in the hand and putting this close to the mouth? And why,
 if he, if it sets it away from the mouth, you listen, the volume gets
 lower. And if you put it closer, the volume raises. So almost
 anything could be, could raise a question if you comes from Mars,
 metaphorically speaking. So that's about when you learn about
 implicit norms. You learn about implicit norms when you come in and
 you are treated as a weirdo because you can't comply to the norms of
 the group because you didn't have the occasion to learn them yet.
 That's the same when you enter a new group, maybe you are on the
 holiday. You have one friend and he or she introduces you to he, her
 group. You don't, you know nothing about them. Probably, the vast
 majority of us would move with care. Why you move with care? Because
 the environment is new. And depending on how far that context, the
 cultural context is from you, you may feel more comfortable. It's
 quite different if you go on holiday on an isolated island in the
 middle of the Pacific Ocean. You know, you don't know the language,
 you don't know the routines, you don't know the culture. You don't,
 you know nothing. You only know that's on planet Earth. So that's
 water. Yeah, that's salty water because it's not lava, of course. But
 you know nothing about the history of the place, how people interact.
 You know nothing about the rules. You know nothing about the norms.
 So you become prudent. And the opposite is when you may estimate that
 that group is a group maybe in Liguria, which is a hundred and a half
 kilometers from here. So you may estimate that the culture is
 precisely the same. It might change the subculture, starting from the
 accent, starting from maybe the possibilities you have, because, you
 know, in a village at sea, it's not like in a town with no sea. There
 are many differences, but those are very little, little differences.
 You may estimate that the vast majority of the norms, also the tacit
 ones, are the same. Unless that's a very bonded group with very, very
 strict ties. So they, you know, they work as a whole, even though
 there are many people inside. And you, maybe you are not being
 accepted at the beginning, because you look different, because you
 are a stranger. So just to say that norms may be codified, but from a
 sociological point of view, the tacit norms are even more interesting
 than the explicit ones. OK, because you have to live to learn from
 them. That's why social scientists want to acquire very well and put
 roots within a group, within a social group, they decide to spend
 several days with it, with people of the group. Just think about
 studying seps, for example, or movements or subcultures. OK, then we
 have values. Values are tricky elements, because the more they are
 social, the less they seem social. Because if a set of values is very
 well spread within a group, each member of the group feels like the
 values are obvious. They don't put values in discussion every single
 day when they are very well accepted within a group. It's obvious.
 OK. And that's also what's interesting in traveling, because if you
 move to another culture, another group of religions, another
 folkloristic approach to life, what's obvious in your own culture, it
 becomes strange in the other one. And what's strange for you, it's
 obvious for the other culture. OK, so values are what is believed to
 be good. And what helps you to define what you should be doing and
 what you should be avoiding to do. OK. Then role, as I anticipated a
 few minutes ago, role is strictly connected with the idea of playing
 the game or acting society. So we usually believe that roles are
 something like actors and actresses playing a character in a movie or
 in theatre. But it's quite different from that. It comes from this
 idea. But, you know, a role is more than being a character. We all
 are characters here. We can't be defined just for being students or
 professors. We are more than that. But we don't show this more than
 that to anybody, to everybody. We decide what we want to show
 depending on the context and on personal or public relationships we
 have with other people. And if we consider this, we may say that from
 a social point of view, a role is not just you need to play the
 character of university professor or university student or tennis
 player or bass player in a band and so on and so forth. It's about.
 The norms. And the social expectations that gather on you. Because
 you are occupying a node in a network, the network is society,
 society is network. So it's it's this kind of web made of hubs,
 nodes, central areas, peripheries and ties. OK. Every one of us
 occupies at least one node, but in today's society, in today's
 societies, things are so complicated that it's impossible to occupy
 just one node. You are a student and a son or a daughter, a sister or
 a brother. That was since the dawn of time. You're also a sportsman
 or a sportswoman. You are also an artist. You are also an hobbyist.
 You are also a civil rights defendants. You are also an influencers
 or what else? You are also whatever you want to be. And so we all
 have different roles. But that means that we simultaneously, in a
 sort of hyperplane, we occupy. Different nodes, which comes with
 several expectations. So that means that when we are speaking of
 roles in sociology, we are speaking of some sort of trait of the
 individual. Which others entitle him or her. So you don't give the
 role or something to yourself. You are given, you are more precisely
 recognized in that role. And indeed, sometimes when you feel you are
 not recognized in one role, you feel uncomfortable. You feel pain.
 You feel there is what's called an inconsistency of status. Culture.
 What is culture? If you add norms, values, roles and their concrete
 applications and their immaterial symbols, you got culture. In the
 end, humankind was able to organize social interactions against
 chaos. That's why we can speak of societies, no matter how simple,
 small or very complex and big they are. But they are very well
 structured. OK, and that kind of social structure is not. And also
 the roles. And the norms, norms, roles and structures are not just a
 peculiar trait of humankind. There are several, several animal
 species which share norms, roles and structures. OK, but what
 differentiates us is that just a few of species have values and
 probably known as culture. Unless humankind. Are there any doubts,
 questions, considerations? So let me move forward. We will end class
 in advance so we don't have a second break. So we will end at a
 quarter to five. It's three. No, sorry. That's too much. We could.
 I'm sorry, but I'm having from Monday to Wednesday the same class to
 the bachelor degree. So, you know, I'm getting confused. This class
 ends in an hour at five thirty. OK, so we are going to if you agree,
 we may we may have just the five minutes break in 15 minutes. And
 then we go to five twenty and we end the class at five twenty. OK, is
 it OK? OK, let's go. So to conclude the sociological journey, let me
 use the image of an iceberg. I think it's useful to depict social
 relations with the image of an iceberg because it's a good metaphor
 or about what happens in reality over the surface. You find two main
 dimensions. One dimension is strictly related to corporality. Let me
 call it this way. It means that we use the body, the nervous system
 and the senses to to perceive and interact with the what's outside of
 us. OK, so one dimension is what we see, what we hear, what we touch,
 what we taste or what we believe we saw. We touched, we felt, we
 tested. And I say and I say what we believe because we can't even be
 completely objective of our senses. They trick us several times.
 Hallucinations, for example, it's not something that only generative
 artificial intelligence is experiencing. Humankind has been
 experiencing since the beginning of its journey on planet Earth. You
 may think you have heard something, but that was only in your mind.
 You may think you have certainly see something which is not what you
 remember. If we take the example of a car, a very simple, not severe
 car accident at the crossroads and we have 10 witnesses, we may
 experience that at least 50 percent of them have different stories to
 tell about what really happened. And then if if some cameras are
 there, we may test that what we can see from the video is even
 different from the from what the witnesses are recalling. That's why
 that's simply because we are not perfect and we are not fully aware
 of every single element around us. So senses are the gates to the
 environment, but also a limitation. Then the second dimension above
 the surface is that we use this information from the senses and the
 way we process them with the filters in our mind, our previous
 experiences, our memory, our trial and mistake system of learning,
 our ability to adapt, our resilience, whatever. So we process this
 information and then we decide how to act or not to act. But from a
 sociological perspective, acting or not acting are always acts. OK.
 What's more interesting is below the surface, below the surface,
 there are other dimensions. First, in this sort of ocean of
 sociological imagination, we have the key elements we use to
 automate, to human learn the way in a more complicated way that
 machines learn. So to automate the vast majority of our activities,
 we don't meta-think and we don't meta-act every single moment of our
 life. Meta means that you don't stop your processing unit thinking,
 I'm thinking. We don't do that all the time. We don't stop thinking,
 I'm doing this every time. You know, there was a nice mimi, but we
 don't learn how to sit down every time we sit down on a chair. OK.
 That's the moment in which if I sit down, the chair breaks and that
 would become a mimi. So I won't sit. I will wait at least less than
 two to become your mimi. So the point is that so those are the
 ingredients that work in our mind as a sort of autopilot. You get
 some sort of consciousness about them when something crops up. When a
 problem arises, when your expectations and your routine is stopped or
 broken. OK, then you start asking what's happening here. And then you
 learn that your autopilot was built on some certainty, certainties
 that you perceived so just because then they never betrayed you
 before. You know, if you have studied philosophy, it's like what the
 British philosopher Hume used to say. You believe that the sun
 tomorrow morning will rise just because it did so all the days
 before. But the day in which this false axiom will be proved false
 will come sooner or later. There will be the last night of a sunset
 and the incoming morning that will be no sun. It will happen in four
 billion years, more or less, but it will come. And so the idea
 basically here is that we take for granted all these things and we
 function thanks to these things, just because we were able to cope
 with the delusion of expectations. And then there is the fourth and
 final dimension. So we may say that as as kids, we learn about useful
 lessons. About life. Since we start to build the sort of encephalic
 system within our mother's belly. And then we start to make this.
 Huge, impressive data retrieval since we come out to the world. So
 those who take care of us, no matter who they are, are transferring
 tons of data about how to ask for being fed, to be cleaned when you
 have some bellyache, when you have some gas in your belly, when you
 want to sleep and you can't, when you don't want to sleep and they
 force you to sleep, when you want to be taken in somebody's arms and
 so on and so forth. And then you grow up and you start learning many
 other things. You start to interact with objects and then go and then
 you move. All this kind of data retrieval and learning is what
 sociologists call primary socialization. So those kind of
 instructions you learn because you imitate, you instinctively react
 to stimuli and then you are told something. When you start to
 understand, you are told something. You are given instructions in
 verbal mode. But that's just the beginning of the journey. Then we
 have the secondary socialization. That means that you feed the
 autopilot with your schooling experiences, with your friendships,
 with your social interactions and the social capital you were able to
 gain, building a network of friends, of acquaintances, of colleagues
 or teammates, of those who you love outside your family or based on
 your professional activities and your media and cultural
 consumptions. The music you listen to, what you watch, the travels
 you make and so on and so forth. OK, so let's have this very quick
 break and then we conclude with this part. OK, just five minutes and
 then we go till 5.20. Thank you. [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK]
 [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK] [BREAK] OK,
 let's go back to the last part of today's class. Take your seat. So,
 sociology is over. Let's move to cyber security. And first of all,
 why it is important to have clear definitions of complex phenomena
 like the ones involved in cyber security? Because, you know, if you
 don't have names, it is difficult to focus on reality because even
 not in a deterministic way, but we mainly, mainly learn from
 topology. So from the idea that we can give name to things and with a
 name, we are able to give something more than a label to reality. But
 we attach with names, descriptions, sometimes also judgments. So we
 will mainly focus on the left part of this scheme and we will try to
 analyze different attempts used to give a name to cyber criminal
 activities. And we will say that it's been a while since the first
 attempt. That even though it's been a while, we are not fully
 satisfied of where we have arrived. Then we will learn also that
 there are so many definitions that we need to find a way to classify
 them. And then also that the strategy we want to implement to
 classify these definitions somehow interfere with the general
 phenomenon known as cyber crime, so that there is no perfect strategy
 to classify cyber crimes, but each strategy comes with pluses and
 minuses. I know you are good people and you trust me, but I want to
 show you that it's not my only worry to look for a definition. It's
 scholars in cyber crime who warn that one of the leading factors of
 the luck in precisely measuring the phenomenon is exactly the fact
 that we don't have very well formed definitions at the moment and we
 don't hold a rigorous classification method, so that the variability
 in cyber crime terms and language highlights the lack of a shared
 lexicon amongst professionals that work in the field. So, if you will
 excuse my allegory, but it's kind of we still today are children
 learning to speak the language of cyber crime. You know that the
 wider and richer the vocabulary, the more complex the thoughts you
 can make, you can formulate. So, just a few coordinates to trace over
 time the popularity of the words used to describe the same objects.
 We start from the window 1995-2000 in which cyber crime wasn't even
 the most popular word used in the field. Very differently from the
 second window 2001-2018 in which by far the word cyber crime became
 the most popular in the scientific literature. Just to say that 30
 years ago we didn't even come together on the most popular level to
 be used to speak about cyber crime from a scientific point of view.
 You may think 30 years is a lot, but it's not. At the pace of
 scientific research, 30 years is a relevant amount of time, but it's
 not that much. And if you want to give a look to one of the attempts
 to classify all the possible species of cyber crime, you will come
 across some sort of classifications like this one here. It's quite
 clear that no matter how long the list is, we will never reach the
 point in which a classification is completely filling the gap between
 the attempt to describe something from a scientific point of view and
 what's happening in reality. And also we can learn from this one that
 maybe some sort of categories are needed to try and be more efficient
 in addressing some issues so that you don't have to enlist every
 single item when you want to talk about a class or a subclass. Now
 this table three shows you, I think, seven definitions of cyber
 crime. They come from different organizations, the United Nations,
 the Council of Europe, the Commission of Europe, the Shanghai
 Cooperation Organization, again the European Union and the
 Commonwealth. Now, I'm asking you to focus on this table for 10
 minutes. And you spend 10 minutes looking at these seven definitions.
 And I need you to come up after 10 minutes with a list of
 considerations that reading these definitions has brought to your
 mind. It might be about they are clear because they are not very well
 clear, not very much clear, because I think that, let me say,
 definitions one and six share this trait in common. None of them is
 addressing this. All of them seem to. So the kind of, you know, just
 elaborate on these seven definitions and provide me with some
 meaningful comments, trying to highlight commonalities, differences,
 and any other possible relevant comments you may want to come up
 with. So it's five o'clock. Let me say at 10 past five, we will start
 discussing, and I will be asking to every row so don't try to hide
 yourself. Just spend this time, 10 minutes together, trying to
 analyze what you have, what you're seeing here. Okay. Thank you very
 much. [ Applause ] [ Silence ] [ Silence ] [ Silence ] [ Silence ] So
 let's listen to your comments, and I would like to start from the
 very last group over there. Please go. Yeah. Then, okay. Any other
 comments? No. So, basically, your idea is the one from 2000 and the
 10th United Nations Congress is the more complete, if I got it right.
 Okay. Okay. So number two and number three is complete. No other
 comments. What about you? Okay. Okay. Okay. So, as the previous
 group, also the second one is for the second and the third, but with
 the merge, and we're trying to clarify some too blurred terms like
 misuse that could be, yeah, I agree, too generic, and depending on
 some subjective judgments, for example. Other comments from that
 side? Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm. Okay. Yeah. Okay. So, maybe attacking some sort
 of technological systems, or you're using technological system to
 attack something else or whatever. That could be a bit confusional,
 and actually both things happen, but maybe it is not that clear from
 these seven definitions. Any other considerations about maybe what
 you, what you think is lacking? Is any group felt that there is
 something missing here? Does anyone feel satisfied with what you have
 read? Okay, so what your colleagues said is that the way they put the
 thing in within this definition is that you, you can really tell
 apart. What's really happening in real world, you just, you tell me
 if I'm, if I got it correctly, but it's kind of, they are using this
 information system as an umbrella term. Almost everything under it,
 but yeah, but then how can I possibly detect what you are referring
 to if you don't give me any kind of clue to say, okay, this is it,
 this is not, and why? [INAUDIBLE] Okay, okay. So, two more elements
 in the second part of the comment. The fact that different
 stakeholders or potential targets of attacks may perceive and
 represent criminal activities on the cyber sphere in a different way.
 And the other one is that if you keep the definition too tool
 dependent, we may think that once maybe one tool is deactivated, let
 me just say, or it is protected because you put some sort of
 firewalls or antiviruses. Let's just say the perspective of some very
 poorly equipped person interacting with digital tools, you may think
 that if you just put some antivirus or some firewalls on your
 machine, then it's okay, nothing can touch you. So, probably the idea
 is that there should be a more deep understanding of different layers
 connected together with the technological one. Other comments? No?
 Okay. We conclude with this slide. We will keep going on from this
 point tomorrow. So, that's basically the answer to some of your
 comments. There are several attempts to try and make it more clear
 and try to classify those definitions in order to make it simpler to
 understand for those maybe who lack some tech knowledge about
 cybersecurity. For example, one proposal is to adopt a sort of
 categorical approach to the systematization of definitions. And in
 this sense, you might consider these two levels here as discrete
 states of a property. So, it's a discrete variable. And if you follow
 this logic, you come to group together those kind of events that are
 cyber-enabled. What does it mean? It means that all those criminal
 activities that have been empowered, have been pushed forward, have
 been increased in magnitude of impact, but they already existed. So,
 they don't depend from, let me use a very philosophical term, they
 don't exist ontologically because of technology. So, those kind of
 robberies that happened even, let me say, in the medieval age, you
 don't have digital technology, but those kind of activities already
 existed. They changed, they've been enlarged, empowered, amplified,
 whatever, but they were not born because of the cyberspace. On the
 opposite side, we find cyber-dependent activities, which are those
 kind of situations that arose thanks to the advent of technology. So,
 if we, by absurd, consider a world without this kind of technology,
 they wouldn't be there. So, please consider, this is the first
 attempt to classify definitions like this, like the ones we have
 discussed today. Tomorrow, we will see more definitions and more
 attempts to classify things. But I promise that we didn't have the
 third break, so I think that we can close today's lessons this way. I
 would like for tomorrow you to come with at least one story, I think
 it will take five minutes to Google it, that you might think it's
 more appropriate to the cyber-enabled activities, and with one story,
 with the cyber-dependent one. So, tomorrow, we will start listening
 to these stories, and then we will try to think whether there could
 be something in the middle here. Okay? So, I'll see you tomorrow.
 Have a good afternoon, and thank you for your attention.
