 Restart recording. So hopefully now everything should be fine. And as
 I was saying, full screen. So you worked in groups on these
 definitions, then we moved on and we were saying that a first
 strategy to classify all these very diverse definitions was to
 consider them as elements of a group of definitions with the same
 relevant traits. And these, let me say, these two categories were
 about considering cybercrime activities as part of enabled by
 technology or dependent from technology. And then we said that these
 classification is very rigid 'cause if you belong to group A, the
 cyber enabled activities, you can belong, you can be part of cyber
 dependent ones. It means that if you belong to A, you don't belong to
 B and vice versa. But things are more complicated than this, so
 sometimes you might need to consider that different activities are
 sort of probabilistic function in a continuum, not in two discrete
 states. States within a property. And so an alternative is this one,
 where you can, well, these other, these new proposal just simply
 changed the label, but the things are almost the same. So type one is
 enabled, type two is some sort of a human activity. Human, human
 enabled criminal activities. So they may change somehow, the two
 labels may a bit change, but what's relevant here is that we consider
 that if we take these two labels as the extreme of a function, all
 the criminal activities should be somehow placed within these sort of
 continuum. So this is to try and fix the rigidity of the previous
 definition, okay? And then there is another proposal, which is not
 based on the idea of a continuum. It goes back to finding categories.
 So discrete states of a general property of cybercrime, and it
 distinguishes these different activities. There are three, but they
 change depending on the official documents you're reading. So at the
 upper side, you see the labels from 2007 classification by Wall, and
 on the lower side, you'll see the classification made in 2013 by the
 European Commission. Let's read them together. In the Wall's
 classification, we can distinguish three different types. The first
 one is crimes against the machine. So you might also read as computer
 integrity crimes. Then the second activities are crimes using the
 machine. So the so-called computer-assisted crimes. And then we see
 the crimes in the machine, as you might find, for example, computer
 content crimes like online hate, harassment, and illegal pornography.
 The European Commission almost provide the same labels, sorry, the
 same definitions, but gives different labels. Those are offenses
 unique to computers and information systems, which in the EU
 Commission perspective are about the computer integrity crimes. Then
 we have what they call traditional offenses, so the computer-assisted
 crimes. And finally, we have content-related offenses, as we already
 said, hate, harassment, and so on and so forth. This is just to show
 you that we still don't have a clear definition, but there were
 several attempts. So that today, if you had to introduce, for
 example, a speech, or maybe one lecture like this one on cybercrime,
 and if you were asked to answer the question, what is cybercrime?
 Your first answer should not be a definition, but probably should be
 something like, well, it depends, it's complicated. It depends on, it
 depends on your perspective. It depends on your sensitivity,
 scientific sensitivity, of course. It depends on what kind of sources
 you are consulting. And it depends on what kind of traits you believe
 are very peculiar of these general social phenomenon so that they are
 so peculiar that you want to stress and to highlight them within your
 definition. So we may say that different stakeholders, different
 institutions, different perspectives, and also different interests
 produce different outcomes in saying what we are talking about. And
 let's dig a bit more in some of these traits. For example, Mr.
 Frederick Chung, the former director of research at the National
 Security Agency in the United States, provides us with this
 definition. A science of cybersecurity offers many opportunities for
 advances based on multidisciplinary approach because, after all, it's
 fundamentally about an adversarial engagement. So what Mr. Chung is
 saying here is that cybersecurity is basically about conflicting
 social interactions. That is to say that, of course, cybersecurity as
 cyber, as the prefix of the term, so it's about technology and
 engineering. Yet what mainly distinguish cybersecurity from any other
 field of knowledge is the fact that it is about the science of
 society and social interactions. And then he describes this sort of
 social interaction, conflicting social interactions, and he says,
 basically, there are humans who must defend something attacked by
 other humans. So it's a sort of humans trying to defend machines from
 human attacks carried out by other machines. And that's why he says,
 we need something more than what we are used to consider the main
 disciplines directly involved in cybersecurity and in cybercrime
 analysis. But what about cyber? Well, the history of the term cyber
 comes from a mix of philosophy, literature, art, and of course, tech
 sciences. Basically, the idea is that when we use cyber, we are
 referring to the fact that we are focusing on communication dynamics
 within a context based on electric or electronical networks. The term
 cyberspace, we already have used it quite a lot in these first two
 days of class. It comes from the 1984 novel from Gibson and
 Neuromancer, as you can read from the slide. So it's something that
 is a sort of neologism that was considered quite useful to describe
 environments that are being studied also from a scientific point of
 view, just not for artistic or entertainment reasons. And so the
 definition of cyber and the term cyberspace stress the fact that it's
 about computer-mediated communication. But the possibilities you may
 witness, encounter in studying the cyberspace are very dynamic. And
 in order to take this element into account, let's read what Public
 Safety Canada in 2010 wrote about it. Cyberspace is an electronic
 world created by interconnected networks of information technology
 and the information of those networks. So we might say, let me be
 maybe rude and a bit naive, but we might say that cyberspace is
 simultaneously the hardware, the software. So the machines you need
 to build an environment, the information produced and circulating
 within the environment and all the possible interactions that you
 might see and you may experience from those participating in this
 kind of space. So there may be interactions among humans and humans
 via machines, humans and machines, of course, vice versa, machines
 and machines, but there is also this new element, humans and
 information, machines and information. So we might say that
 information is a kind of stimulus that may be connecting humans and
 humans, machine and machines, and humans and machines. And if we
 don't take into account these third element, we are missing a
 relevant part of what can explain cyber engineering attacks. Any
 doubts till now, questions, comments, nothing? Okay. Let's add two
 more dimensions. So just to recap, we moved from cyber crime to
 cybersecurity. We just said that they're very strictly connected. And
 we said also that as we are speaking about cyber, we are concentrated
 on computer mediated communication in a set of very dynamical
 activities. Involving hardware, softwares and the information which
 they are imbued of. Now let's add a third and the fourth element. The
 third element is about the common meaning of security, which is about
 taking into account and mitigate for as much as possible risks and
 control, control hazards. In our case, hazards are mostly represented
 by attackers, being them humans or machines. There's something or
 someone that decided to attack us or our properties. And you want to
 control your properties. You want to protect them. You also want to
 control hazards. So those things that may become ill and dangerous,
 evil and dangerous towards you and your properties. And then the
 fourth dimension we want to take into account is the capability to
 ask the correct questions. And this is summed up in the work from
 1998 from Buzz and Weaver and Wild where they say that if you are
 discussing security in a cyberspace environment, you should be able
 to understand who securitizes on what issues, meaning threats, for
 whom, why, what results and under what conditions. It's a sort of,
 let me say, let me put it this way. It's a sort of checklist, a
 cognitive checklist, not an empirical one. Just to take clear all the
 passes you have to control before starting something about maybe a
 security strategy and or an ex post analysis. Then if we keep
 following Craig and Alia work from 2014, we may identify nine
 different definitions about cybersecurity. Let's read them and not in
 a very, let me say, automatic way just to read something. It's about
 doing together today the work I asked you to do in groups yesterday.
 And actually, I already done the job for you. Let's think about it.
 Six out of nine definitions very much remark what we could call a
 defense paradigm. A paradigm is a very general, wide, cognitive,
 mental and knowledge window you apply to recognize, identify, then
 study, describe and explain a reality. So just to say, I'm not gonna
 have a philosophy of science class now, but just to help you get
 acquainted with names, a set of theories consistent among them are
 part of a general paradigm, okay? So in this case, of course, the six
 definitions might differ quite a while one from the other, but they
 do have one common ground. This common ground is the general paradigm
 they want to stick to. And that's stressing about the defensive
 attitude in cyber security. So if you tag the first one, cyber
 security consists largely of defensive methods. It's quite clear
 here. They are using the adjective, so it's explicit, but it's a
 definition from camera from 21 years ago. Then we have Lewis three
 years later, another scholar, another timeframe, the same paradigm.
 We different words, safeguarding. And then if you take number four,
 for example, the ability to protect and defend. So it's about, it's
 about protection from hazards, from evil behaviors, but that's not
 the only paradigm we might find in the literature. For example, quite
 a different one is the continuity paradigm. And I'm calling it this
 way, 'cause if we read definition from Kanonja and Mandarino 2014, we
 may see the art, meaning that soft skills and creativity are strongly
 needed. Otherwise you would have said the science. If it's art, it
 means that you rely quite a lot on soft attitudes and skills, which
 do not always overlap scientific method. It's not to say that you're
 not scientific in doing cybersecurity this way. It's that you do have
 the theory, but holding theory, holding tech knowledge, it's not
 enough to be a very good professional in cybersecurity. That's the
 same they say about surgeons. Of course, surgery is a scientific
 discipline, but medicine in general can be deemed as completely
 scientific and period. It requires intuition, creativity somehow,
 practical skills, the art of sewing, the art of cutting, the art
 of... Have you ever watched some sort of medical TV series? So why am
 I wasting my time? You know, that's too much stressed. Of course,
 it's fiction, but a little of that fictional representation, it is
 real. So you're not a very good physician or a surgeon just because
 you study it a lot and you can theoretically speak about your matter,
 okay? You are required to have some practical ability, some sort of
 intuition, some sort of empathy and geniality sometimes that mixed
 together these traits will help you deal and cope with those cases
 where books and previously checked methods maybe are not enough,
 okay? So the paradigm here is the art of ensuring the existence, so
 survival and continuity of the employees of the information society
 of a nation. Yeah, they want to address the issue at the national
 level, but what is important here is to stress that you are not
 focusing on a total defense, okay? You know that when an attack
 happens, you might be wounded, you might lose something, but your
 first goal should be not a major failure. You should be able to avoid
 any major failure. And in order to do so, you should also be ready to
 decide where you have to concentrate first. Like in a natural
 disaster, of course you would want to fix immediately everything and
 help immediately everyone, but resources are limited and not all the
 situations are the same. So you have to get ready to apply different
 scenarios depending on the severity of what's happening. And you
 should be able to consider what are your major critical elements that
 you don't want at all to be lost. And then of course, the more
 energy, the more resources, the more capabilities you have to
 simultaneously address everything, of course you do it. You do it,
 but it depends on the scenario. There are some very several very bad
 scenarios in which being omniscient, being everywhere, it's
 practically impossible, even though from a general point of view, you
 really would want to do it. That means continuity. If you have to
 keep alive a system, you should be able to put in a list the critical
 cores of the system and the secondary tertiary collateral resources
 that of course, if it were on you, you wouldn't want to lose. But if
 you have to, you consider that losing them, it's bad. It does come
 with impacts, but it's less worse than losing the other thing. 'Cause
 you might be wounded. It might be painful. It might be critical to
 lose these things, but not that painful, critical or life-threatening
 as losing the others, okay? So I know it's not at all easy to talk
 about this, but that's the only protocol you may be able to apply in
 very critical conditions, okay? Then there's also a definition with
 the more ecological perspective. Ecology in this case means that you
 take into account that the system is a complex environment populated
 by different elements and that the system itself works and works
 properly when all the elements in the environment are somehow
 balanced. So ecology, it's complexity due to the interactions of many
 elements in a sort of balance. An ecological system like ours, for
 example, with the climate crisis is a risk. Not because there won't
 be any sort of ecosystem if we keep going down the precipice of the
 climate crisis. It's that the system as we know it won't be balanced
 enough to preserve our own lives. So even here, when we talk about
 being balanced and ecosystems, we need to take into account some sort
 of perspective. Balance or unbalance depend on the perspective and
 the stakes you are taking into account, okay? And so this very
 definition is relevant also because probably following the idea from
 the continuity paradigm, it states that mitigation is a key resource.
 So, you know, we might say that the defense paradigm is more about
 let's avoid and let's be totally protected at least in abstract.
 These new paradigms, these other paradigms, there's not something new
 or old. You may find them simultaneously right now around the
 scientific literature on cybersecurity, but these other paradigms are
 more like, no, it's simply an illusion to protect the systems
 completely. So let's work hard to protect them completely, but let's
 design some different situations in which that was not possible. And
 so how can we mitigate? How can we guarantee some sort of continuity?
 How can we take into account the fact that the system is like a body?
 So not all the parts are worth the same. Of course, you want to
 preserve the integrity of the system, like the integrity of the body,
 but if you can't 'cause you're attacked. If we hadn't evolved as a
 species taking into account the fact that also our body is a complex
 system where different parts have different priorities, we wouldn't
 have learned to protect ourselves. For example, putting the arm
 before the head if something is striking it. We would say, no, I'm
 too fond of my arm. Please just crash my head. We are putting an arm
 before the head because we're saying let's do it. That's better to
 break an arm than to be squashed in the head, okay? 'Cause we very
 well know that for as painful that might be, for as severe it might
 be, a wound to the arm, it is on average on a lower level of severity
 than a wound or a very strong hit to the head, okay? So let's say
 that continuity and ecosystem are just considering that because
 damages happen, let's get ready, let's be very well trained to
 completely protect us. But because that's hypothetical, let's
 consider what we should preserve from damages if some sort of an
 attack happens. And then the last one is about risk. Cybersecurity,
 so here they shift the perspective from the ecological metaphor, the
 body metaphor, the life continuity of the system metaphor to the
 theory of risk. So they are saying cybersecurity involves reducing
 the risk of militia and attack to software, computers and networks,
 ta-ta-ta-ta-ta. Okay, so the most important thing here is we can
 measure the magnitude of an attack. 'Cause when you hear the word
 risk, the first thing that should bump on your mind is there is some
 sort of equation to measure something, mostly in the form of
 probability. And then in today's society, also some sort of
 economical forecast of damages that you have to compare to your
 investments to protect yourself. In fact, there are some goods out
 there, some services out there that can be protected by any sort of
 insurance. 'Cause to protect them, it will cost that much that you
 won't ever reach some sort of break even. Or on the opposite, that
 you don't want to protect 'cause you know that your investment should
 be so high that you will never recover. So you better risk to have an
 attack than to try and economically protect you from something that
 it will never pay off, right? So when you listen, when you hear risk,
 those are the kind of discourses that are being made in assessing
 security and crimes. And so nine definitions. Do we really need a
 10th? And my answer after having studied the literature that I'm
 bringing to you in class is that, yeah, we do. We do it very much
 'cause we learn a lot from all these nine definitions. We can take
 useful elements to better focus on what cybersecurity is about, the
 complexity, the multidisciplinary approach needed, the role of
 machines and humans and information combined together. But at the end
 of the day, we still can't reply to the questions what cybersecurity
 is about. Oh, we can do it. But now we know that if we take only one
 of these definitions, we will cover just a small part of a more
 general phenomenon. So before going to the first break, let's see
 what kind of ingredients it would be wise to take if we had to mix
 together all the definitions we already have read. Let's focus first
 on common things. So that's a sort of step two of the work I asked
 you to do yesterday. So we have read them, we have commented them.
 Then we have to sketch something to make it easier to remember what
 is worth to be taken and what we can drop. So from common elements, I
 would say that, of course, there's no definitions that doesn't take
 into account the technicalities. That's quite obvious. We are
 speaking of something which deals mainly with technology. Cyberspace
 is first and foremost a technological environment. It's not only a
 technological environment, but it wouldn't exist without technology,
 okay? So that's the first. Second, another element in common is
 cybersecurity is about something happening. So it's about events. You
 don't have events, you can't, you have nothing in your hands. And
 that is why cyber crimes are getting subtle and subtle and subtle,
 'cause if you are able to become invisible, if you don't leave any
 trace behind you, nobody will notice that you committed a crime,
 okay? So today, most of the technical part, but I'm not the most
 expert person you're gonna meet in the class to say it, but let me
 just tell this. Most of the job now is about pulling above the
 surface what is going very deeply below in order to have some sort of
 body of evidence to start with, to mitigate, to fix, and then to
 learn from. You don't have evidence, you can't make any scientific or
 practical consideration about what you want to study, what you want
 to understand. Third, even though the nine definitions talked about
 them in a very different and diverse way, each of them took into
 consideration methods, the need for strategies, and some sort of
 process to implement the will to securitize the system. And then
 fourth, even though machines, and we will see before the end of the
 class, we will deal with this element, even though machines with
 today's tools of artificial intelligence and deep learning are
 getting more and more autonomous in move attacks and try to defend,
 we still today need some sort of human interaction. And finally, all
 the definitions have, while setting goals, cybersecurity is for this
 reason, they are also setting what you need to protect. And then we
 could try, some of you did it, did this yesterday, actually,
 depending on the period, we might reconstruct in a sort of reverse
 historical engineering, what kind of objects were the most relevant
 in a given period, machines, computers, then data, then privacy, then
 that, then also from a legislative point of view, things changed a
 lot in this field. We now consider crimes, activities, we didn't have
 even a word to describe them 10, 20, 30 years ago. So those are the
 common traits. Let's see three distinguishing aspects. Not only the
 definitions address the sociotechnical perspective, the idea that in
 order to properly assess cybersecurity today, you need as many
 technical capabilities as those coming from humanities and the social
 sciences. You remember the first definition, the first suggestion
 from the former director from the United States, he said, "Because
 it's about human and human machine interactions, "we need
 multidisciplinary approach." Second, the fact that some of them put
 into the analysis a different scale. There was a definition, I don't
 remember which one, but just recall the keyword. It was saying, "Is
 made to mitigate at the national level." So we might assume that that
 definition was considering cyber attacks, an issue from both a
 technical, but also from a political point of view. It's about the
 security of a site. It's about diplomacy. It's about economical and
 financial investments. It's about espionage and so on and so forth.
 And third, let me add, it's about war and peace, unfortunately. Cyber
 crimes are now very much part of the warfare everywhere. You don't
 see today's conflicts without some sort of cyber activity. And
 unfortunately, we have plenty of examples, so I think I don't need to
 justify my statement. And then the third element is about stressing
 the importance of be very reactive, the importance of being reliable
 and resilient to changes and build system capable of surviving
 somehow with a high degree of connectedness. So these are common
 traits and peculiarities from those nine definitions. This should be
 the way in which, if I had to ask you again to work on something, as
 I will do, I'm expecting you to work. Let's have this 10, 12 minutes
 break, and then we keep going. And hopefully we open some doors
 'cause I feel it's quite... , okay. So let's start again. Now let's
 move to this 10th definition and let's see it together. So the 10th
 definition could sound more or less like this. Cybersecurity is the
 organization and collection, I will first read it, then I will
 explain any single element in it. So cybersecurity is the
 organization and collection of resources, processes, and structures
 used to protect cyberspace and cyberspace enabled systems from
 occurrences that misalign the Euro from the fact or property rights.
 So this is the legal conclusion. I was spoiling up yesterday to some
 of you which to which I talked about at the end of the class, to whom
 I talked about. And let's see element by element what this definition
 is about. First, let me say the sociological element of the need for
 organization as cybersecurity is a complex activity is addressed as
 the first keyword in this definition. And I can swear that definition
 was not made by me. So I'm not bringing here a vested interest. Let
 me open. I was talking about the legal conclusion we were spoken
 about with you yesterday. That's the definition which contains that
 conclusion. And so I was saying that the first keyword here is that
 the social and sociological traits of cybersecurity is addressed
 considering that we think of cybersecurity as an activity which need
 some sort of structural definition. And when I say a structural
 definition, I'm saying that cybersecurity needs an organization. And
 so we can now go back to the keywords we have discussed at the
 beginning of the class yesterday. When I told you, please keep in
 mind, it's about sociology, but we will be needing them very soon.
 Roles, norms, values, relationships, backstage, front stage. All of
 these elements go within the keywords of organization and resources.
 'Cause when we speak of resources, of course we are first and
 foremost attract to thinking of, we need technologies, we need money,
 we need connections, we need energy. Yeah. But we also need people
 capable of interpreting and entering the mind of an attacker or of a
 group. We need people maybe sometimes in some sort of complex
 investigation to mimic to pretend to be someone else and to act in
 order to be credible. When you apply some sort of virtual
 infiltration in some online groups in the dark web, for example, you
 don't improvise. And to be very skilled from a technological point of
 view, it's not enough. That's not enough. You can design a 500,000
 euros camera, but that doesn't mean you are an actress, you are an
 actor or you are a director, a movie director. But then sometimes it
 happens that the more you apply to technology, the more you become
 also skilled in producing or thinking about content within the
 technological environment. Just think of James Cameron. And you will
 tell me he entered the board of one of the most promising Gen AI
 company because he is very good at using tech. He co-designed some of
 the stuff he used in his movies. He became who he is because he was a
 very famous director. So he's the kind of mixed role I was talking
 about yesterday with the idea of mixing humanities and social
 sciences to engineering. I'm not saying you must follow his path. I
 wish you very much if you want because he's famous, smart. He's very
 good at doing many things. And of course he was able to gain plenty
 of money. But the general idea is there are different kinds of
 resources to be fully equipped from a technical point of view. It's
 not enough. Then you need the roles. So then you have to precisely
 clarify what sort of expectations draw on each person involved in the
 organization because of his or her position. And then you have to
 plan what kind of processes depending on different scenarios the
 organization must stay stick to because you don't improvise because
 you don't follow completely your instinct. Sometimes you have to, but
 generally speaking, the moment in which the emergency strikes, it's
 not the moment you must be creative. Creativity should be a very huge
 part of the process in advance. You don't get creative the moment in
 which the emergency is there and you're asked to do something. So the
 scope now, it's that you use these resources, processes and
 structures in a very well-organized design to protect cyberspace and
 cyberspace enabled system from what? Before answering this, let's
 consider that it's not just about being emphatic that the definition
 is addressing the scope of cybersecurity to cyberspace and something
 else because by the definition we read at the beginning, cyber is
 everything connected to electrical and let me say digital networks,
 machine softwares, people, but today there's a huge part of
 applications, tools, open, demi-open, private digital environments
 which rely somehow on, the general system we call cyberspace, but
 they are not completely part of it in the sense that they have some
 overlaps. Let's think to something that it is not even new at all
 today, but it was when I started to do these jobs 15 years ago, the
 internet of things, and we can say it's not cyberspace, but it's not
 only cyberspace. Your smart fridge, I don't know if you have one, if
 you do, please tell me your feedbacks. It remains an appliance, but
 we can't say it's detached from cyberspace. If you wear smart
 glasses, the coffee machines around the Politecnico, they are all
 connected. I must be very unlucky, 'cause yeah, they are connected,
 but I barely make to connect my phone to them when I want a coffee,
 but that's just being unlucky, but there's no reason to consider them
 something completely detached from cyberspace. They are not simply
 cyberspace. They are first and foremost some sort of vending machine
 to provide you with drinks, but if someone want to attacks the
 university, he, she, it, they, who knows, want to find some sort of
 hole within the very machine. So we must consider that cybersecurity
 is about protecting the cyberspace as a whole. So for example, the
 internet in the broadest sense of the term, it's many different
 completely digital environments and hold the possible hybridations we
 are witnessing. Things, smart appliances, mobile communication
 systems, and wearables, and who knows what's ahead, okay? So that's
 the objects. And finally, what is the hazard you want to protect them
 from? And as I told to some of you yesterday, what's fun here is that
 instead of trying, as some of the past classifications did, you
 remember those tables with dozens of items saying cyber crimes could
 be these, but also these, but also these, and then you have to list
 something like 30, 40, 50, 100 different items. Instead of doing
 this, this definition is quite good because it try to sum up and to
 abstract all the different possibilities. This is interesting 'cause
 even though tomorrow we invent something new like instead of the
 electric kick scooter, we invent some flying kick scooter, I pray the
 destiny not to have these quite soon 'cause if there is these cows
 around with kick scooters, which I usually them on, which I use them
 very often on a daily basis, but that's why I see why they are so
 dangerous 'cause people are rushing at 20, 30 kilometers per hour on
 every sidewalks. And I hope that we will be educated in using them
 quite soon, but if we invent something like that, that is something
 that will become a possible object of attack in the future. So you
 see that if we had to enlist everything that already exists or that
 could be in the near or in the mid or far future, I think there is no
 space on any presentation to do so. So they came up with this idea.
 What do all the possible items of cyber crimes have in common? And
 that's a sort of lateral thinking. They share the fact that they are
 based on some rights as individuals, institutions, companies, we get
 our social and moral dignity because we are considered human beings
 with the capability of reasoning, thinking, and with the sort of, let
 me say, moral dignity that is there just because we are alive. I'm
 not inventing anything. I'm just trying to very badly and quickly
 resume some of the main outcomes of that historical period that in
 Europe happened across the 70 and the 18th century, which is called
 Enlightenment, right? And some basis idea of the Enlightenment were
 that when humans supply their culture supply their cognitive
 processes, reasoning capabilities to themselves and to the
 environment around them, they discover that they become citizens, not
 people of some sort of, of untouchable power. The idea to make, for
 example, religious and political powers accountable is an idea that
 was born during the Enlightenment and brought to, after decades or
 centuries, to put into discussion the absolute monarchy, for example.
 To help secularize the Catholic church, for example. And then to
 bring in some chart of rights and in the end, parliaments and
 contemporary democracy. So this brief historical philosophical
 journey to say what? That thinking of cybersecurity as a matter of
 civil rights and particularly a very specific type of rights, the
 property rights is the key that these definition used to be brief,
 very sharp, focused, and to make it finally clear what is the final
 aim or of protecting people systems from cyber attacks. There is this
 sort of gap that is generated by every cyber attack. You attack
 something that is not your, and it's not yours, and you want to take
 control of it or you want to have access. The access is illegal, not
 because of some metaphysical issue. There is no some sort of entity
 say, no, you are not, you don't enter this place. It's not that, it
 is not about that. It is about something very practical, very
 empirical related to the concept of right. If you do not have access
 in something, it's because you don't own the property of it or you
 don't, you can't claim any right on it. And also the idea of private
 is something new that was born in the very Enlightenment era. It was
 brought about the following decades with the idea of making the
 monarch accountable. Why I am saying so, because of many reasons.
 First, because I'm a sociologist, so you have to excuse me. Second,
 because if we don't open these black boxes, we just take for granted
 what is given, but that's not the case. The sense of violation, you
 as a subject of an attack, you feel, and we will see it by the end of
 the class, is something that may impact your sense of security, your
 psychological tranquility, your will to expose your facts or not to
 somebody, but not to everybody. But this idea of privacy, it's
 something very modern. We invented it during the Alignment and in the
 following decades as a sort of empowerment of the people against the
 absolute power of the monarchy and of the church. And that was the
 moment in which people, driven by philosophers like Diderot,
 d'Alembert, Immanuel Kant, started to think that there was no
 abstract reason to passively have another entity decide on your life
 and your death, that you wanted to have your dignity, your personal
 dignity and the dignity of your group recognized so that you could
 pursue your happiness in life as far as other privileged groups like
 nobles, clergymen, and, of course, the monarchy did for centuries.
 It's not that, of course, this brought also revolutions, but it's not
 about, speaking of revolution, it's about considering where rights
 come from and that the impact of a right violation is something that
 it's pervasive. It influences any dimension from a personal, inner,
 so psychological, health, and also the social and political level. So
 the misalignment, it's something that, if you don't know what a right
 is and where it comes from, and the philosophical and moral
 perspectives it embraces to justify itself. So that we do have the
 word violation to describe when a right isn't respected. If we don't
 take account all these kind of reasonments, I think we can grasp the
 value of concluding the definition of cybersecurity as an act against
 cybersecurity is when we see a misalignment in property rights. It's
 from a technical point of view, we would say no, an attack is when
 this happens from a technical point of view, yeah. And then if
 technology changes, what? A criminal cyber act is when we are able to
 detect this with this instrument, okay. And then when instruments
 changes, when we change the scale, when we rephrase completely the
 concept below that tech, that technology, are very good having a
 digital microscope, but what if we change the law of light? You will
 say that will never happen. Well, maybe, yeah, I can agree. That's
 just a metaphor, but we have to consider that the way we think of
 light today is not the way Newton thought of light. So he did change.
 That's why we need to think to a criminal cyber attack as something
 that we can start addressing when we have some technical or let me
 say social scientific tool and procedure that can verify that the
 property rights are misaligned. What does it mean? It means that
 there is a subject, no matter if an individual or an institutions or
 a company, that from an abstract point of view is entitled for the
 property rights of a good. And that if we check some sort of key
 indicators like the privacy of the data, if the owner wants the data
 to be private, the number of accesses in the environment, the kind of
 accesses or the consistencies of the data and the systems within the
 property or any other possible thing that may be against the privacy
 of the data the power of decision of the owner, every time we see
 these kind of situations, we may hypothesize that a misalignment is
 there. Any questions or comments or what else about this 10th
 definition? Yeah. (faintly speaking) (faintly speaking) (faintly
 speaking) Yep. Okay. So basically if I may translate the questions
 'cause maybe those that are connected without the microphone can hear
 properly. So I repeat the question and I will rephrase it, you will
 tell me if I'm getting it right or not. Basically the idea is that,
 yeah, that's very interesting, but if you hadn't been here telling us
 that's the 10th definition, it has some sort of plus compared to the
 others, we wouldn't have noticed it. And I can basically say, yeah,
 you're right. That's why I'm here. That's not a joke. It's of course
 you need some sort of guide through these sort of wild wilderness of
 buzz around how can we define cyber security and cyber crime. So
 yeah, it's not strange to feel a bit confused. If I had to suggest
 what kind of definition it's important for you to remember, the 10th,
 the last one is the most important. For the reasons I tried to
 explain to you. What about the others? What I can swear is that I
 will never ask in the test. My part is formatted as Professor Leo is
 one. So you won't notice the difference in term of what type of test
 are we gonna be asked to solve to pass the exam. It's the same system
 of questions that Professor Leo is thinking of. So if I remember
 well, it's based on mainly open questions. And I will put a small
 amount of questions compared to the general topics of the class. So
 the vast majority of questions will be Professor Leo's ones. But the
 way, a small part of questions could be, it depends on how many
 questions we decided to have in the test or maybe he has already
 decided. And he told me probably, but you know, it was before the
 summer, the summer holidays. And I don't remember quite well the exam
 number. But you know, it's a small proportion of the whole. So it
 could be maybe two questions out of 10 in general or some kind of
 proportion like that. But don't take this for granted. What you have
 to take for granted that as you only have 20 hours with me, that will
 be reproportionate in term of number of questions about sociology in
 the class. But if the test is based on open questions, there will be
 open questions for sociology as well. I will never put a question
 asking you, tell me definition number three in slide seven. That's
 simply stupid. It will be stupid for me. That will be that I think I
 don't know how to do my job and I have a very low consideration of
 you. But I have a very high consideration of students. I really like
 my job and I really like having you in my class. So my duty is to
 help you be empowered with sociological knowledge, not to trick you
 in a test. So if, and I feel like I would try and trick you if I ask
 like, tell me definition number four. But definition number 10 could
 be asked. Yeah, it's the only one among all the definitions 'cause I
 believe and that's not an absolute, but it's my personal
 consideration after having explored a very big part of the scientific
 literature on this, that this definition deserves to be remembered.
 What I can ask about what we have seen is, can you briefly resume the
 main common elements and peculiarities from all the definitions apart
 the 10th we have seen in class? That's not claiming and expecting
 that you remember all the ninth definition word by word, but you may
 have made starting some notes about these elements is in common, this
 is not in common. And I don't care if you remember the element two is
 from definition six and eight, that's not relevant. It's just the key
 features. So it's kind of, you know, trying to do maybe something
 like that. I could ask in a questions considering, or I could even
 put all the definitions in the test. So you read them. And then I ask
 you to produce something like that. And because it's an open
 question, what I'm expecting is that depending on your study,
 depending on the time you spend trying to think about these things,
 your attention in class, my capability to be clear, but that's a
 constant. So, you know, if I'm poor, I'm poor for everybody. If I'm
 on average, I'm on average for everybody. There's no some sort of
 filter in your ears that sensor some words, that's a constant. But
 then I will expect you to comment on it, okay? That's why we need
 open questions 'cause the most relevant part of the sociological
 class on a cybersecurity class is improving your reasoning
 capabilities in a way that is different from what you could do with
 common sense stereotypes. So, you know, I think that after
 sociological class is not very, it's not a very well, it's not a good
 way to start an answer. I think it's something we may say outside the
 class, drinking a coffee at the bar with the friends, within the
 family, within ourselves. But if we have studied some social
 sciences, that it's not about I think, it's evolutivity, you
 remember? So it's based on scientific literacy, based on what these
 scholars, this study, this theory, these philosophical sociological
 perspective, we might say that that's very different from I think,
 right? But more generally, you know, there are still quite a lot of
 topics. So I know now you have, you feel the need to be clarified,
 but this is just a minimal part of what we're gonna see. So what I
 can say is that I want you to be rigorous, but for me, being rigorous
 doesn't mean you, you just repeat as a poem what you have studied.
 You need to memorize something, because without memorization, you
 don't hold the terms and the logic. But then you have to apply some
 reasonment about what I'm asking. So you will expect from me
 questions in which rigor and reasonment are quite mixed together. If
 you lack one of them, you won't have the top score. But, and then
 what you, because we are speaking about how to study and how to get
 ready for the exam, let me also say that. I know you won't be asked
 to apply any maths in my class, at least not in this one. There are
 classes where there's maths also in sociology. But not in this case.
 That may be risky for some of you, 'cause if you are very well
 trained in applying formulas and so on and so forth, you might feel
 overconfident in studying sociology, 'cause it's only made about
 reasoning and words and speaking about something that is very much
 qualitative from your point of view, from the point of view of
 engineering students. I had the very same feeling at the beginning of
 my university coming from a scientific high school, the Galfer next
 to the Politecnico here. And so my very first sociological exam was
 very poor. And that was not because that wasn't interesting. I ended
 up being a sociologist. It was because coming from maths and physics
 in the high school, I deemed very easy and qualitative. Everything I
 was reading about sociology. And then I thought that whatever
 question I would have found a way to trick the professor just
 describing and, you know, if I don't remember, I will say something
 more or less, it's about that. No, it's that more or less, which I
 really discourage you to try in my exams. Not being coded with
 numbers and formulas doesn't mean you don't have to be rigorous.
 Words have meaning. I spent six hours yesterday and today just
 talking about definitions and terms. So when you use a term, you are
 asked to know very well the meaning, the scientific meaning, the
 technical meaning of that term. And if you don't use a proper
 terminology, that's like mistakenly calculating some sort of formulas
 in a practical exercise. It's precisely the same. That's a mistake.
 And of course, I can help you over the class. We can maybe simulate
 some sort of questions to have you trained to the sociological
 writing and studying, but please remember this. You won't undergo
 surgery with some physician that doesn't know every single meaning of
 the element is gonna touch within your body, okay? And that's the
 same even though nobody's risking his or her life like in sociology,
 okay? But the kind of being sharp and clean in thinking is reachable
 only if you study very well things and you remain rigorous with a
 very technical terminology. This is my first and most important, I
 believe, suggestion. Then you will, I can assure you, I will never
 trick you. I will never ask things that are, as I said, are useless
 like studying nine different definitions. No, remember the common
 traits. Yeah, that's about reasoning. Of course, you have to memorize
 something, but I won't ask you the perfect definition. This 10th, as
 I said, it's useful, but it's not very important to know it word by
 word, but you can't miss the fact that it is based on the idea of
 organization, resources, processes, and misalignment, okay? That's
 it. Then you might be, you may act like an LLM. You guess
 stochastically and see what happens mixing those keywords, and
 hopefully you will come with a thousand different definitions using
 the same word. But the idea is basically that this definition has two
 key elements, sociology at the beginning, resources, organizations,
 processes. Low at the end, misalignment in a property rights. That's
 it. (faintly speaking) , yeah, I may translate misalignment , into
 this. For misalignment, it is intended, the fact that, you remember
 we said that roles are about norms and expectations. A property right
 comes with some sort of expectations for you as an owner, okay? When
 you feel, when you experience that your expectations are diluted,
 that's a misalignment. So let me say, I own my Instagram profile, but
 if Mita decides to block me, I feel a misalignment. It doesn't mean
 it's a cybersecurity reason, or it could be, my profile could be
 hacked. So it's been suspended, and I have to demonstrate that I
 didn't do anything, I was hacked, and I get it back. But what are
 the, what is the least of expectations for the attacked, as owner of
 the object being attacked? For example, that if I own a profile
 online, I can access whenever I want through that profile. If that
 doesn't happen, there may be some connectivity issue. So it doesn't
 mean that any misalignment has a cybersecurity threat below, but it
 could also be. So the misalignment is a sort of first alarm that is
 raised to tell apart those cases which have nothing to do with cyber
 crimes, to those that at least might be so suspected cases. But to
 try and think what a misalignment is, you have to take into
 consideration expectations of being entitled with some sort of right.
 For example, as a former video gamer, my device is in the cabinet,
 waiting for my oldest child to grow up a bit. But I moved from
 cassettes to CDs to DVDs to download it online directly on your
 platform. Okay, when you download something, you depend on the
 provider. If I buy a game and I installed it on my hard disk or I
 have access to it on the cloud, I am expecting to play any time I
 want as if I had the old DVD or CD. If that doesn't happen for some
 reason, that's a misalignment from my expectation as owner, even
 though I don't own any object 'cause I don't even have the CD, I
 don't have anything in my hand, but I bow the right to have access to
 that feature anytime I want. Then agreements may change. There might
 be some issues with the provider, it's databases, it's data centers,
 it's hosting capabilities and so on and so forth, and that is against
 my right. Most of the times we don't do anything, we just wait. Then
 you could, if you want, and that happens many times, you can sue
 maybe because I have rights, you weren't able to respect those
 rights, I have paid for, and maybe in the worst case scenario, you
 may, as a provider, you may have a class actions from the users, from
 the gamers, for example. Why I'm saying that? 'Cause every single
 time you buy or you have some sort of right of accessing, using,
 owning something, you have expectations about that property. The
 moment in which those expectations are not respected under many
 circumstances, you have a misalignment. In the scope of
 cybersecurity, for example, it might be, let me say the most stupid
 thing, let me say the most stupid thing, maybe I have some sort of
 folder on a cloud and I want to duplicate a file, and then I discover
 that I don't have access to the file anymore, and it pops up a
 message with insert password. What's happening there? That's a
 misalignment. As the owner of that file, then, of course, we don't
 really own them. It's Dropbox, Google, Apple, Amazon, or what else,
 which really owns them. But as a user, you have your property rights
 or your usage rights. It depends. We should be reading all the
 thousand of pages that we skip when we accept the service, but
 there's very well written what kind of rights you may exercise toward
 the providers and the object you're in the services. But anyway, it's
 just that, that was free. I just had to put my account and password,
 and then it doesn't work anymore. It asks me something more. That's a
 misalignment. It could be, again, a failure on the provider without
 any cybersecurity threat, or it could be something like that. You
 have a WordPress website, and they managed to enter it, and they
 changed the password, and they are asking you, if you want to receive
 your website back, just paying Bitcoins or whatever, that's a
 misalignment 'cause the website is yours. It's an asset of yours. You
 are the owner, the master of the backend. You decide the colors, the
 content, and then you see that you still have the DNS, but instead of
 your website, there's something else, or some local data have been
 exposed, and so on and so forth. So as an owner, you decide also the
 level of privacy of your data, unless in the contract, it's
 differently stated. But then somebody takes your data and exposes
 them. You still own your data 'cause you have a copy, and you may
 even have access to your digital asset, but somebody copied part of
 the data and put them publicly. That's another misalignment 'cause as
 the owner, you can decide the level of privacy of those data. And if
 these changes without your consent, that's a violation, and then
 that's a cyber crime. And again, it's a misalignment. So it's not
 about owning, it's also about deciding some sort of metadata about
 your data and your properties. Is it more clear now? If not, we can
 repeat it. Don't worry, okay? Shall we keep going and closing
 advance, or do you want a break? Let's vote. Raise your hands for a
 break now. Okay, great, that's the vast majority. You want to get rid
 of me, I can understand. It's Friday and it's sociology. Okay. So
 let's recap. What are we talking about when we speak of
 cybersecurity? First, complexity. This definition addresses the fact
 that cybersecurity is about complex organizations, okay? Complexity
 is given, arises from interactions between humans, between systems,
 and between humans and systems. Second, extensiveness. Extensiveness
 is about the idea that the idea that protection is something very
 wide. It includes systems integrity, data privacy, assets ownership,
 and whatever. But it's about any kind of security. It's about any
 kind of violation of your expectations filtered through the rights of
 property. Let me say, let me put it very rudely. In a non-democracy
 governmental system, it's very normal, even though you don't notice,
 that the government, the state, have access to your personal digital
 assets, like your chats, your profiles, and so on and so forth. Your
 conversations. That's totally legal, unless in a democracy, unless
 there is a reason. And any magistrate in a democracy must have been
 allowed, for example, to listen to your personal conversations or to
 have access to your personal data. Some of the scandals of past years
 were about discovering that what I just said, was violated even if
 the state was a democracy. But extensiveness, it's not only about
 what do we need to be protected from, but also what may have
 generated the cyber threat. but also what may have generated the
 cyber threat. It could be a criminal activity. It means there is an
 intention to harm. It might be negligency. So it might be an
 accident, poor procedures, mistakes, or negligence. The fact that you
 don't want to harm and you want nothing bad to happen, but you don't
 put all the attention required and all the care requested to avoid
 something happens. And third, it might be also some sort of natural
 hazard. And third, it might be also some sort of natural hazard. Let
 me say, as we have seen, unfortunately in Valencia, the big tragedy
 caused by the floods. And when chaos struck in a social environment,
 free riders come up. So they had to put, law enforcement, both to try
 and save people, to try and fix all the damages, but also to
 discourage groups of thefts from stealing things from homes, shops.
 from stealing things from homes, shops. Malls, and so on and so
 forth. Malls, and so on and so forth. So we may think that something
 similar happens when a natural hazard struck an environment where
 some crucial technology has been settled where some crucial
 technology has been settled so that the access to that technology so
 that the access to some property that was very well regulated before
 the hazard stroke. It's not working properly now. So maybe you may
 very easily have access to some sort of resources, digital resources.
 You might take control of digital properties. You may, you know what?
 Or a natural hazard stroke in some cyber criminal decides to spread
 fake news to have an impact on public opinion or to have people
 already shocked by the natural event, feel insecure even more, or
 behave in a way that might be revealed or behave in a way that might
 be revealed to be harmful or dangerous for themselves. And that they
 wouldn't have taken into consideration if that fake news hadn't been
 created. The third element is about unpredictability. The idea to
 protect here is addressed to a full range of events. And as we said
 already, but takes also into account some sort of situations that are
 still virtual that didn't happen yet, but that you want to be ready
 to cope with just in case. So there is a sort of justification for
 the investment in knowledge and resources for prevention. And
 finally, the most peculiar part of the definition is the conclusion,
 which brings in some legal theory. So there's the theory of property
 rights that is used to detect and define what is cyber crime from the
 side of the consequences. So when you read the Euro, it means that
 institutionally speaking, code of law in your hand, things should be
 like that. De facto, for those not Latin speakers, it means in
 concrete. So from a theoretical point of view, from the point of view
 of law, things should be like this. But in practice, what are you
 experiencing? If there's an overlap between the two, it's okay. If
 there's a difference, if there's a gap, the wider the gap, the most
 critical the attack, okay? Any questions about this? Nothing,
 everything is unclear enough to move on. Okay, yeah. Yeah, they are
 very similar in the sense that, we might consider extensiveness as a
 function on the x-axis and the broadness as a function in the y-axis.
 So that we may say that here is about how many different type of
 hazards you may happen to encounter. And here, how strong is the
 magnitude? What differentiates the most, the two ones, is the
 unpredictability here. So it's the idea that at this level, you may
 have case studies. At this level, you may want to push forward. Like,
 okay, let's see the case that an attack like this one, which has
 stolen 1,000 objects, 10,000 of credit card, secret codes, is pushed
 to the extreme. Let's see if 1 million of them within the same
 context would be affected with such a criminal attack. What will be
 the main consequences from a technical point of view, from a fixing,
 so solutions, point of view of solutions, and also from the very
 sociological impact of will customers still entrust us, or what
 should we do? That would be the main difference between the two. But
 they, of course, they are quite similar in the general sense. Other
 questions? No, okay. Okay. So now let's move to the right side of the
 scheme I showed you yesterday before closing today's class. And let's
 go back to classifications and let's comment then. As you may see,
 this table is a typology of offenses which dates back to 2001. So we
 may say it's quite old, but it's interesting to try and plot some
 sort of trend in assessing cyber crime over time. In this first
 categorization, there are five categories. Number one, gathers those
 criminal activities dealing with confidentiality, breaches,
 integrity, and availability of data. So illegal access, illegal
 interception, data interference, misuse of devices, system
 interference. Then category two is about computer-related offenses.
 And for the Council of Europe, that was based on computer-related
 forgery, computer-related fraud. So you use a computer to make some
 sort of scam. And then category number three, it's content-related
 offenses. And at least in the 2001 classification, that was addressed
 by only one article with one object that was offenses related to
 child pornography. So category number four was offenses related to
 infringements of copyright and related rights. So that's the case of
 Napster in that very year. More or less, that was the period. And
 then the last one was about racism, xenophobia that were committed
 using user computers. And then they specified that that was about
 dissemination of racist and xenophobic material, racist and
 xenophobic motivated threat, racist and xenophobic motivated insult,
 denial, gross minimization, approval, or justification of genocide or
 crimes against humanity, and then aiding and abetting. That was it.
 That's not the only classification. And another one we have already
 identified and talked about quickly, it reduces categories to four.
 Let's see the main difference. In this case, it's not only about
 giving different labels to the same things, it's assuming somehow a
 different perspective. 'Cause if we read the first category, for
 example, it's called cyber trespass. So here, we might say that, let
 me rephrase it. This classification is very strongly in depth with
 the defense paradigm. This is either, but we might say in a slightly
 different way 'cause first of all, instead of thinking cyber crime as
 a sort of fight of an attacker, let me put it brutally, punching the
 attacked. In this case, there's these stress on the social dimension
 of spaces, of environments. To understand category number one, it's
 useful to go back to Irving Goffman. You remember the one whose book
 was being read in the "Mindhunters" Netflix series I talked to you
 yesterday. Yeah, Irving Goffman used to say that any social activity
 as basically is based on two complementary moments. One moment is
 what is seen by the vast majority of people or stakeholders involved
 or actors, as we say in his metaphor, involved in some sort of play.
 So we might say that this is a play and I'm acting as a professor and
 you as students. So there are expectations attached to one's own
 role. There are tacit and explicit norms. An explicit norm is that if
 we don't respect each other, we are reported and that's very
 explicit. A tacit norm is that, which is becoming even, which is
 actually becoming explicit years after years, but that was very tacit
 at the beginning, is that I am supposed to be a good teacher. So I'm
 supposed to entertain you, to provide you with reliant and solid and
 profound content. And I'm supposed to public speak, okay? To know how
 to public speak. Of course, I know I have limits, but those are two
 examples of what is expected. The same from you, it's not written. So
 it's implicit, but I have put it quite clear yesterday. I'm
 requesting your attention during my classes. You won't find it in any
 norm at any university around the world. That's an implicit norm. I'm
 requested to be good at teaching or to be the best I can. And you are
 requested to do your best at being attentive and concentrated during
 a class, okay? Even though I know it's Friday and it's five o'clock
 in the autumn, I know. So, and then explicit norm from your side is
 that if you want to get a degree, you have to pass exam and make a
 thesis. That's very explicit, okay? So just to say that these, if we
 consider the situation of a classroom at the university, these are
 expectations, roles, environments, equipments, and explicit and tacit
 norms as well. But this very play as a backstage, the front stage is
 the moment in which we meet in public, the exams, the thesis, the
 lesson. Then we all have backstages. The backstage, for example,
 limited to this very class was when during summer I was building up
 the slides and studying the literature, right? That was my backstage
 of this class. Your backstage could be when you go home and try to
 reorganise your notes on where you will try to remember what I said.
 So go back to the recordings and so on and so forth when you will be
 getting ready for the exam. That's your backstage. Why it is
 important? Because when we feel that an improper overlap, improper
 meaning, not wanted, not desired, not asked, overlap between the
 front stage and the backstage is happening, we feel a sort of
 violation, okay? That could be, let me go on with this very silly
 example. If a group of you jumped in my room, in my office during my
 preparation, saying, "Please, Prof, no, don't put this topic, "no, we
 don't want to hear it." That's funny 'cause these kinds of violations
 may be embarrassing, may be funny, may be epic fails or may be
 violence. There's a degree of possibilities. It might be funny, for
 example, 'cause it's full of meme and viral videos out there which
 became funny 'cause maybe, you know, the one I saw on TikTok
 yesterday was about... Ah, yeah, the joke that an older brother did
 it to his younger one. He pretend to got cut and to have blood from
 his hands and the younger one fainted in front of the mom, crossing
 by, so the older one is keeping up the younger so that he is not
 scolded by the mommy. You know that, yeah. So these kind of moments
 may also be funny 'cause the general scope was to make public a
 trick, but it wasn't thinking of my brother, he will be fainting live
 on my social media, but that happened and if it's live, he stares,
 okay? So that may be funny, but then it might be embarrassing or it
 might be a sort of violence, right? We can move this Irving Goffman's
 metaphor of front and backstage to cyber crime, thinking that cyber
 trespass is precisely about this. It's considering your backstage
 made of your digital assets and you as the owner, as the rights
 holder, you may decide when to open, to whom, for what, when to
 close, what to make private, you may decide what to delete and when,
 what to copy and to duplicate and for what reason. So you have
 completely control of that, but then something or someone crosses the
 boundaries, that's the limit that these first category addresses.
 Trespassing something and making a violation just because you tried
 or you managed to enter a sphere that have boundaries and you break
 them to enter. Second category, cyber deception or theft. You want to
 steal information or valuable items and you do it in different ways.
 Most of them still take into account trespassing the boundaries, but
 sometimes you may want, and this is not clear here, but we will see
 it next lesson. You may apply some sort of mimicking activity. You
 may pretend to be or to act for something or someone else. And in
 this case, of course, it's a violation of a boundary, but you are
 allowed in just as, you know, how many times we hear that all people
 are scummed by thefts that pretend to be someone else. The very same
 thing happens online, but in a way that it's getting more and more
 difficult to tell apart when there is some sort of acting out there
 and when it's real. Third case, it's mostly the same of the past
 classification and it's about cyber pornography and obscenity. So it
 is defined as the use of ICT to access sexually explicit and illegal
 sexual content. And we will see that with the increasing amount of
 violations under this aspect, we had to invent new terms. We had to
 take into consideration something that in the first definitions was
 missing, like explicit consent, right? So to say that the adjective
 illegal here, it's not only about violence in the old sense of the
 term, but it becomes violence. So illegal any act without explicit
 consent, right? Let me say it 'cause, you know, it's very delicate
 and I want to treat it with very care, but it is an issue and it's a
 cyber criminal activity, but revenge porn is cyber crime in this very
 third category, okay? You may have had the consent to record
 something into a digital asset, but not to share it. Or you may have
 been asked to cancel it and you didn't. That's a criminal activity,
 okay? And then the fourth, cyber violence. It means high speech, it
 means, for example, suicide instigation or dangerous activities. So
 you, bullying, harassment, you incite someone to test himself or
 herself in doing something that may come up in a very severe injury
 or in death and so on and so forth. Organized crime, sorry, this is a
 really important. Terrorism, so you use some sort of a video game
 platform and you use the chat within a video game to make some sort
 of proselytism to convince people to act as lone wolves, so to kill
 other people and so on and so forth. It happened. We know very well
 that some of the most recent terroristic attacks in Europe were made
 by lone wolves and that chats on video game platforms were also used
 to try and gather those figures and convince them to move, to be
 trained and then to act with some sort of terroristic attacks, okay?
 Are there any doubts, questions you may want to ask? So good news is
 that if I remember well, we won't be good news for you. I will be
 missing you. But good news for you is that you have a two weeks break
 from me. And we will, I guess, if I remember correctly, 'cause my
 calendar says that next class with me will be Thursday the 28th,
 correct? So two weeks of purification from sociology and then we will
 keep going. Anyway, let me thank you very much 'cause I know it's
 difficult. I know it might be new and novelty can become interesting
 but can also have some difficult to be accepted. And as far as I'm
 knowing you, you have been very carefully connected with the lesson
 and that's something that I really appreciate. So good evening, see
 you in two weeks and have fun 'cause the weekend is coming, okay?
 Bye-bye.
